Next: Compiling C++ Programs, Previous: Option Summary, Up: GCC Command
Options   [Contents][Index]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2 Options Controlling the Kind of Output ¶

Compilation can involve up to four stages: preprocessing, compilation
proper, assembly and linking, always in that order. GCC is capable of
preprocessing and compiling several files either into several assembler
input files, or into one assembler input file; then each assembler input
file produces an object file, and linking combines all the object files
(those newly compiled, and those specified as input) into an executable
file.

For any given input file, the file name suffix determines what kind of
compilation is done:

file.c

    C source code that must be preprocessed.

file.i

    C source code that should not be preprocessed.

file.ii

    C++ source code that should not be preprocessed.

file.m

    Objective-C source code. Note that you must link with the libobjc
    library to make an Objective-C program work.

file.mi

    Objective-C source code that should not be preprocessed.

file.mm
file.M

    Objective-C++ source code. Note that you must link with the libobjc
    library to make an Objective-C++ program work. Note that ‘.M’ refers
    to a literal capital M.

file.mii

    Objective-C++ source code that should not be preprocessed.

file.h

    C, C++, Objective-C or Objective-C++ header file to be turned into a
    precompiled header (default), or C, C++ header file to be turned
    into an Ada spec (via the -fdump-ada-spec switch).

file.cc
file.cp
file.cxx
file.cpp
file.CPP
file.c++
file.C

    C++ source code that must be preprocessed. Note that in ‘.cxx’, the
    last two letters must both be literally ‘x’. Likewise, ‘.C’ refers
    to a literal capital C.

file.mm
file.M

    Objective-C++ source code that must be preprocessed.

file.mii

    Objective-C++ source code that should not be preprocessed.

file.hh
file.H
file.hp
file.hxx
file.hpp
file.HPP
file.h++
file.tcc

    C++ header file to be turned into a precompiled header or Ada spec.

file.f
file.for
file.ftn
file.fi

    Fixed form Fortran source code that should not be preprocessed.

file.F
file.FOR
file.fpp
file.FPP
file.FTN

    Fixed form Fortran source code that must be preprocessed (with the
    traditional preprocessor).

file.f90
file.f95
file.f03
file.f08
file.fii

    Free form Fortran source code that should not be preprocessed.

file.F90
file.F95
file.F03
file.F08

    Free form Fortran source code that must be preprocessed (with the
    traditional preprocessor).

file.cob
file.COB
file.cbl
file.CBL

    COBOL source code.

file.go

    Go source code.

file.d

    D source code.

file.di

    D interface file.

file.dd

    D documentation code (Ddoc).

file.ads

    Ada source code file that contains a library unit declaration (a
    declaration of a package, subprogram, or generic, or a generic
    instantiation), or a library unit renaming declaration (a package,
    generic, or subprogram renaming declaration). Such files are also
    called specs.

file.adb

    Ada source code file containing a library unit body (a subprogram or
    package body). Such files are also called bodies.

file.s

    Assembler code.

file.S
file.sx

    Assembler code that must be preprocessed.

other

    An object file to be fed straight into linking. Any file name with
    no recognized suffix is treated this way.

You can specify the input language explicitly with the -x option:

-x language
--language=language
--language language

    Specify explicitly the language for the following input files
    (rather than letting the compiler choose a default based on the file
    name suffix). This option applies to all following input files until
    the next -x option. Possible values for language are:

        c  c-header  cpp-output
        c++  c++-header  c++-system-header c++-user-header c++-cpp-output
        c++-system-module
        objective-c  objective-c-header  objective-c-cpp-output  objc-cpp-output
        objective-c++  objective-c++-header  objective-c++-cpp-output
        objc++-cpp-output
        assembler  assembler-with-cpp
        ada  adascil  adawhy
        cobol
        d
        f77  f77-cpp-input  f95  f95-cpp-input
        go
        modula-2  modula-2-cpp-output
        rust
        algol68
        lto

    Note that -x does not imply a particular language standard. For
    example -x f77 may also require -std=legacy for some older source
    codes.

-x none

    Turn off any specification of a language, so that subsequent files
    are handled according to their file name suffixes (as if -x has not
    been used at all).

If you only want some of the stages of compilation, you can use -x (or
filename suffixes) to tell gcc where to start, and one of the options
-c, -S, or -E to say where gcc is to stop. Note that some combinations
(for example, ‘-x cpp-output -E’) instruct gcc to do nothing at all.

 -c ¶
--compile

    Compile or assemble the source files, but do not link. The linking
    stage simply is not done. The ultimate output is in the form of an
    object file for each source file.

    By default, the object file name for a source file is made by
    replacing the suffix ‘.c’, ‘.i’, ‘.s’, etc., with ‘.o’.

    Unrecognized input files, not requiring compilation or assembly, are
    ignored.

 -S ¶
--assemble

    Stop after the stage of compilation proper; do not assemble. The
    output is in the form of an assembler code file for each
    non-assembler input file specified.

    By default, the assembler file name for a source file is made by
    replacing the suffix ‘.c’, ‘.i’, etc., with ‘.s’.

    Input files that don’t require compilation are ignored.

 -E ¶
--preprocess

    Stop after the preprocessing stage; do not run the compiler proper.
    The output is in the form of preprocessed source code, which is sent
    to the standard output.

    Input files that don’t require preprocessing are ignored.

  -o file ¶
--output=file
--output file

    Place the primary output in file file. This applies to whatever sort
    of output is being produced, whether it be an executable file, an
    object file, an assembler file or preprocessed C code.

    If -o is not specified, the default is to put an executable file in
    a.out, the object file for source.suffix in source.o, its assembler
    file in source.s, a precompiled header file in source.suffix.gch,
    and all preprocessed C source on standard output.

    Though -o names only the primary output, it also affects the naming
    of auxiliary and dump outputs. See the examples below. Unless
    overridden, both auxiliary outputs and dump outputs are placed in
    the same directory as the primary output. In auxiliary outputs, the
    suffix of the input file is replaced with that of the auxiliary
    output file type; in dump outputs, the suffix of the dump file is
    appended to the input file suffix. In compilation commands, the base
    name of both auxiliary and dump outputs is that of the primary
    output; in compile and link commands, the primary output name, minus
    the executable suffix, is combined with the input file name. If both
    share the same base name, disregarding the suffix, the result of the
    combination is that base name, otherwise, they are concatenated,
    separated by a dash.

        gcc -c foo.c ...

    will use foo.o as the primary output, and place aux outputs and
    dumps next to it, e.g., aux file foo.dwo for -gsplit-dwarf, and dump
    file foo.c.???r.final for -fdump-rtl-final.

    If a non-linker output file is explicitly specified, aux and dump
    files by default take the same base name:

        gcc -c foo.c -o dir/foobar.o ...

    will name aux outputs dir/foobar.* and dump outputs dir/foobar.c.*.

    A linker output will instead prefix aux and dump outputs:

        gcc foo.c bar.c -o dir/foobar ...

    will generally name aux outputs dir/foobar-foo.* and
    dir/foobar-bar.*, and dump outputs dir/foobar-foo.c.* and
    dir/foobar-bar.c.*.

    The one exception to the above is when the executable shares the
    base name with the single input:

        gcc foo.c -o dir/foo ...

    in which case aux outputs are named dir/foo.* and dump outputs named
    dir/foo.c.*.

    The location and the names of auxiliary and dump outputs can be
    adjusted by the options -dumpbase, -dumpbase-ext, -dumpdir,
    -save-temps=cwd, and -save-temps=obj.

-dumpbase dumpbase ¶
--dumpbase dumpbase

    This option sets the base name for auxiliary and dump output files.
    It does not affect the name of the primary output file. Intermediate
    outputs, when preserved, are not regarded as primary outputs, but as
    auxiliary outputs:

        gcc -save-temps -S foo.c

    saves the (no longer) temporary preprocessed file in foo.i, and then
    compiles to the (implied) output file foo.s, whereas:

        gcc -save-temps -dumpbase save-foo -c foo.c

    preprocesses to in save-foo.i, compiles to save-foo.s (now an
    intermediate, thus auxiliary output), and then assembles to the
    (implied) output file foo.o.

    Absent this option, dump and aux files take their names from the
    input file, or from the (non-linker) output file, if one is
    explicitly specified: dump output files (e.g. those requested by
    -fdump-* options) with the input name suffix, and aux output files
    (those requested by other non-dump options, e.g. -save-temps,
    -gsplit-dwarf, -fcallgraph-info) without it.

    Similar suffix differentiation of dump and aux outputs can be
    attained for explicitly-given -dumpbase basename.suf by also
    specifying -dumpbase-ext .suf.

    If dumpbase is explicitly specified with any directory component,
    any dumppfx specification (e.g. -dumpdir or -save-temps=*) is
    ignored, and instead of appending to it, dumpbase fully overrides
    it:

        gcc foo.c -c -o dir/foo.o -dumpbase alt/foo \
          -dumpdir pfx- -save-temps=cwd ...

    creates auxiliary and dump outputs named alt/foo.*, disregarding
    dir/ in -o, the ./ prefix implied by -save-temps=cwd, and pfx- in
    -dumpdir.

    When -dumpbase is specified in a command that compiles multiple
    inputs, or that compiles and then links, it may be combined with
    dumppfx, as specified under -dumpdir. Then, each input file is
    compiled using the combined dumppfx, and default values for dumpbase
    and auxdropsuf are computed for each input file:

        gcc foo.c bar.c -c -dumpbase main ...

    creates foo.o and bar.o as primary outputs, and avoids overwriting
    the auxiliary and dump outputs by using the dumpbase as a prefix,
    creating auxiliary and dump outputs named main-foo.* and main-bar.*.

    An empty string specified as dumpbase avoids the influence of the
    output basename in the naming of auxiliary and dump outputs during
    compilation, computing default values :

        gcc -c foo.c -o dir/foobar.o -dumpbase '' ...

    will name aux outputs dir/foo.* and dump outputs dir/foo.c.*. Note
    how their basenames are taken from the input name, but the directory
    still defaults to that of the output.

    The empty-string dumpbase does not prevent the use of the output
    basename for outputs during linking:

        gcc foo.c bar.c -o dir/foobar -dumpbase '' -flto ...

    The compilation of the source files will name auxiliary outputs
    dir/foo.* and dir/bar.*, and dump outputs dir/foo.c.* and
    dir/bar.c.*. LTO recompilation during linking will use dir/foobar.
    as the prefix for dumps and auxiliary files.

-dumpbase-ext auxdropsuf ¶
--dumpbase-ext auxdropsuf

    When forming the name of an auxiliary (but not a dump) output file,
    drop trailing auxdropsuf from dumpbase before appending any
    suffixes. If not specified, this option defaults to the suffix of a
    default dumpbase, i.e., the suffix of the input file when -dumpbase
    is not present in the command line, or dumpbase is combined with
    dumppfx.

        gcc foo.c -c -o dir/foo.o -dumpbase x-foo.c -dumpbase-ext .c ...

    creates dir/foo.o as the main output, and generates auxiliary
    outputs in dir/x-foo.*, taking the location of the primary output,
    and dropping the .c suffix from the dumpbase. Dump outputs retain
    the suffix: dir/x-foo.c.*.

    This option is disregarded if it does not match the suffix of a
    specified dumpbase, except as an alternative to the executable
    suffix when appending the linker output base name to dumppfx, as
    specified below:

        gcc foo.c bar.c -o main.out -dumpbase-ext .out ...

    creates main.out as the primary output, and avoids overwriting the
    auxiliary and dump outputs by using the executable name minus
    auxdropsuf as a prefix, creating auxiliary outputs named main-foo.*
    and main-bar.* and dump outputs named main-foo.c.* and main-bar.c.*.

-dumpdir dumppfx ¶
--dumpdir dumppfx

    When forming the name of an auxiliary or dump output file, use
    dumppfx as a prefix:

        gcc -dumpdir pfx- -c foo.c ...

    creates foo.o as the primary output, and auxiliary outputs named
    pfx-foo.*, combining the given dumppfx with the default dumpbase
    derived from the default primary output, derived in turn from the
    input name. Dump outputs also take the input name suffix:
    pfx-foo.c.*.

    If dumppfx is to be used as a directory name, it must end with a
    directory separator:

        gcc -dumpdir dir/ -c foo.c -o obj/bar.o ...

    creates obj/bar.o as the primary output, and auxiliary outputs named
    dir/bar.*, combining the given dumppfx with the default dumpbase
    derived from the primary output name. Dump outputs also take the
    input name suffix: dir/bar.c.*.

    It defaults to the location of the output file, unless the output
    file is a special file like /dev/null. Options -save-temps=cwd and
    -save-temps=obj override this default, just like an explicit
    -dumpdir option. In case multiple such options are given, the last
    one prevails:

        gcc -dumpdir pfx- -c foo.c -save-temps=obj ...

    outputs foo.o, with auxiliary outputs named foo.* because
    -save-temps=* overrides the dumppfx given by the earlier -dumpdir
    option. It does not matter that =obj is the default for -save-temps,
    nor that the output directory is implicitly the current directory.
    Dump outputs are named foo.c.*.

    When compiling from multiple input files, if -dumpbase is specified,
    dumpbase, minus a auxdropsuf suffix, and a dash are appended to (or
    override, if containing any directory components) an explicit or
    defaulted dumppfx, so that each of the multiple compilations gets
    differently-named aux and dump outputs.

        gcc foo.c bar.c -c -dumpdir dir/pfx- -dumpbase main ...

    outputs auxiliary dumps to dir/pfx-main-foo.* and
    dir/pfx-main-bar.*, appending dumpbase- to dumppfx. Dump outputs
    retain the input file suffix: dir/pfx-main-foo.c.* and
    dir/pfx-main-bar.c.*, respectively. Contrast with the single-input
    compilation:

        gcc foo.c -c -dumpdir dir/pfx- -dumpbase main ...

    that, applying -dumpbase to a single source, does not compute and
    append a separate dumpbase per input file. Its auxiliary and dump
    outputs go in dir/pfx-main.*.

    When compiling and then linking from multiple input files, a
    defaulted or explicitly specified dumppfx also undergoes the
    dumpbase- transformation above (e.g. the compilation of foo.c and
    bar.c above, but without -c). If neither -dumpdir nor -dumpbase are
    given, the linker output base name, minus auxdropsuf, if specified,
    or the executable suffix otherwise, plus a dash is appended to the
    default dumppfx instead. Note, however, that unlike earlier cases of
    linking:

        gcc foo.c bar.c -dumpdir dir/pfx- -o main ...

    does not append the output name main to dumppfx, because -dumpdir is
    explicitly specified. The goal is that the explicitly-specified
    dumppfx may contain the specified output name as part of the prefix,
    if desired; only an explicitly-specified -dumpbase would be combined
    with it, in order to avoid simply discarding a meaningful option.

    When compiling and then linking from a single input file, the linker
    output base name will only be appended to the default dumppfx as
    above if it does not share the base name with the single input file
    name. This has been covered in single-input linking cases above, but
    not with an explicit -dumpdir that inhibits the combination, even if
    overridden by -save-temps=*:

        gcc foo.c -dumpdir alt/pfx- -o dir/main.exe -save-temps=cwd ...

    Auxiliary outputs are named foo.*, and dump outputs foo.c.*, in the
    current working directory as ultimately requested by
    -save-temps=cwd.

    Summing it all up for an intuitive though slightly imprecise data
    flow: the primary output name is broken into a directory part and a
    basename part; dumppfx is set to the former, unless overridden by
    -dumpdir or -save-temps=*, and dumpbase is set to the latter, unless
    overridden by -dumpbase. If there are multiple inputs or linking,
    this dumpbase may be combined with dumppfx and taken from each input
    file. Auxiliary output names for each input are formed by combining
    dumppfx, dumpbase minus suffix, and the auxiliary output suffix;
    dump output names are only different in that the suffix from
    dumpbase is retained.

    When it comes to auxiliary and dump outputs created during LTO
    recompilation, a combination of dumppfx and dumpbase, as given or as
    derived from the linker output name but not from inputs, even in
    cases in which this combination would not otherwise be used as such,
    is passed down with a trailing period replacing the compiler-added
    dash, if any, as a -dumpdir option to lto-wrapper; being involved in
    linking, this program does not normally get any -dumpbase and
    -dumpbase-ext, and it ignores them.

    When running sub-compilers, lto-wrapper appends LTO stage names to
    the received dumppfx, ensures it contains a directory component so
    that it overrides any -dumpdir, and passes that as -dumpbase to
    sub-compilers.

 -v ¶
--verbose

    Print (on standard error output) the commands executed to run the
    stages of compilation. Also print the version number of the compiler
    driver program and of the preprocessor and the compiler proper.

-### ¶

    Like -v except the commands are not executed and arguments are
    quoted unless they contain only alphanumeric characters or ./-_.
    This is useful for shell scripts to capture the driver-generated
    command lines.

--help ¶

    Print (on the standard output) a description of the command-line
    options understood by gcc. If the -v option is also specified then
    --help is also passed on to the various processes invoked by gcc, so
    that they can display the command-line options they accept. If the
    -Wextra option has also been specified (prior to the --help option),
    then command-line options that have no documentation associated with
    them are also displayed.

--target-help ¶

    Print (on the standard output) a description of target-specific
    command-line options for each tool. For some targets extra
    target-specific information may also be printed.

--help={class|[^]qualifier}[,…]

    Print (on the standard output) a description of the command-line
    options understood by the compiler that fit into all specified
    classes and qualifiers. These are the supported classes:

    ‘optimizers’

        Display all of the optimization options supported by the
        compiler.

    ‘warnings’

        Display all of the options controlling warning messages produced
        by the compiler.

    ‘target’

        Display target-specific options. Unlike the --target-help option
        however, target-specific options of the linker and assembler are
        not displayed. This is because those tools do not currently
        support the extended --help= syntax.

    ‘params’

        Display the values recognized by the --param option.

    language

        Display the options supported for language, where language is
        the name of one of the languages supported in this version of
        GCC. If an option is supported by all languages, one needs to
        select ‘common’ class.

    ‘common’

        Display the options that are common to all languages.

    These are the supported qualifiers:

    ‘undocumented’

        Display only those options that are undocumented.

    ‘joined’

        Display options taking an argument that appears after an equal
        sign in the same continuous piece of text, such as:
        ‘--help=target’.

    ‘separate’

        Display options taking an argument that appears as a separate
        word following the original option, such as: ‘-o output-file’.

    Thus for example to display all the undocumented target-specific
    switches supported by the compiler, use:

        --help=target,undocumented

    The sense of a qualifier can be inverted by prefixing it with the
    ‘^’ character, so for example to display all binary warning options
    (i.e., ones that are either on or off and that do not take an
    argument) that have a description, use:

        --help=warnings,^joined,^undocumented

    The argument to --help= should not consist solely of inverted
    qualifiers.

    Combining several classes is possible, although this usually
    restricts the output so much that there is nothing to display. One
    case where it does work, however, is when one of the classes is
    target. For example, to display all the target-specific optimization
    options, use:

        --help=target,optimizers

    The --help= option can be repeated on the command line. Each
    successive use displays its requested class of options, skipping
    those that have already been displayed. If --help is also specified
    anywhere on the command line then this takes precedence over any
    --help= option.

    If the -Q option appears on the command line before the --help=
    option, then the descriptive text displayed by --help= is changed.
    Instead of describing the displayed options, an indication is given
    as to whether the option is enabled, disabled or set to a specific
    value (assuming that the compiler knows this at the point where the
    --help= option is used).

    Here is a truncated example from the ARM port of gcc:

          % gcc -Q -mabi=2 --help=target -c
          The following options are target specific:
          -mabi=                                2
          -mabort-on-noreturn                   [disabled]
          -mapcs                                [disabled]

    The output is sensitive to the effects of previous command-line
    options, so for example it is possible to find out which
    optimizations are enabled at -O2 by using:

        -Q -O2 --help=optimizers

    Alternatively you can discover which binary optimizations are
    enabled by -O3 by using:

        gcc -c -Q -O3 --help=optimizers > /tmp/O3-opts
        gcc -c -Q -O2 --help=optimizers > /tmp/O2-opts
        diff /tmp/O2-opts /tmp/O3-opts | grep enabled

--version ¶

    Display the version number and copyrights of the invoked GCC.

-pass-exit-codes ¶
--pass-exit-codes

    Normally the gcc program exits with the code of 1 if any phase of
    the compiler returns a non-success return code. If you specify
    -pass-exit-codes, the gcc program instead returns with the
    numerically highest error produced by any phase returning an error
    indication. The C, C++, and Fortran front ends return 4 if an
    internal compiler error is encountered.

-pipe ¶
--pipe

    Use pipes rather than temporary files for communication between the
    various stages of compilation. This fails to work on some systems
    where the assembler is unable to read from a pipe; but the GNU
    assembler has no trouble.

-wrapper ¶

    Invoke all subcommands under a wrapper program. The name of the
    wrapper program and its parameters are passed as a comma separated
    list.

        gcc -c t.c -wrapper gdb,--args

    This invokes all subprograms of gcc under ‘gdb --args’, thus the
    invocation of cc1 is ‘gdb --args cc1 …’.

-ffile-prefix-map=old=new ¶

    When compiling files residing in directory old, record any
    references to them in the result of the compilation as if the files
    resided in directory new instead. Specifying this option is
    equivalent to specifying all the individual -f*-prefix-map options.
    This can be used to make reproducible builds that are location
    independent. Directories referenced by directives are not affected
    by these options. See also -fmacro-prefix-map, -fdebug-prefix-map,
    -fprofile-prefix-map and -fcanon-prefix-map.

 -fcanon-prefix-map ¶

    For the -f*-prefix-map options normally comparison of old prefix
    against the filename that would be normally referenced in the result
    of the compilation is done using textual comparison of the prefixes,
    or ignoring character case for case insensitive filesystems and
    considering slashes and backslashes as equal on DOS based
    filesystems. The -fcanon-prefix-map causes such comparisons to be
    done on canonicalized paths of old and the referenced filename.

-fplugin=name.so ¶

    Load the plugin code in file name.so, assumed to be a shared object
    to be dlopen’d by the compiler. The base name of the shared object
    file is used to identify the plugin for the purposes of argument
    parsing (See -fplugin-arg-name-key=value below). Each plugin should
    define the callback functions specified in the Plugins API.

-fplugin-arg-name-key=value ¶

    Define an argument called key with a value of value for the plugin
    called name.

 -fdump-ada-spec[-slim] ¶

    For C and C++ source and include files, generate corresponding Ada
    specs. See Generating Ada Bindings for C and C++ headers in GNAT
    User’s Guide, which provides detailed documentation on this feature.

-fada-spec-parent=unit ¶

    In conjunction with -fdump-ada-spec[-slim] above, generate Ada specs
    as child units of parent unit.

-fdump-go-spec=file ¶

    For input files in any language, generate corresponding Go
    declarations in file. This generates Go const, type, var, and func
    declarations which may be a useful way to start writing a Go
    interface to code written in some other language.

@file

    Read command-line options from file. The options read are inserted
    in place of the original @file option. If file does not exist, or
    cannot be read, then the option will be treated literally, and not
    removed.

    Options in file are separated by whitespace. A whitespace character
    may be included in an option by surrounding the entire option in
    either single or double quotes. Any character (including a
    backslash) may be included by prefixing the character to be included
    with a backslash. The file may itself contain additional @file
    options; any such options will be processed recursively.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Next: Compiling C++ Programs, Previous: Option Summary, Up: GCC Command
Options   [Contents][Index]
