       Back to the future:
Data efficient language modeling

         Tatsunori Hashimoto
             Stanford CS
Roadblocks to progress in machine learning
      Algorithms                        Data                          Compute
(better function classes)    (lack of supervised data)   (inability to process all the data)




       What is the major bottleneck to continued improvements in ML (and LLMs)?
Data lies at the heart of recent advances
Pretraining data




   Known pretraining recipes all emphasize the important of the data mix
Data lies at the heart of recent advances
Instruction tuning / post-training




   Simple algorithms with the ‘right’ data (for instruction-tuning / RLHF)
                   gets you quite far for instruction tuning
Data lies at the heart of recent advances
Reasoning capabilities




   Even something as complex as ‘long CoT reasoning’ can (to a suprising
           extent) be unlocked with naïve methods + the right data
Data scarcity problems on the horizon




   Thus far, data constraints have not been acute since internet data is vast
           But compute has been growing much faster than data
Statistical learning has much to say in this regime
      Data >> Compute                  Compute >> Data
    (Pretraining / FM era)          (Classical deep learning
                                         .. and the future?)
The problems of the future are those of the past




                   In a compute rich world,
      understanding and engineering data becomes critical




       Understanding generalization from data is a foundational question
                      in statistics and machine learning!
    What is there to do?




       Understanding generalization                         Synthetic data
Rich phenomena in algorithmic generalization   Firm conceptual (and theoretical) foundation
     Part 1: Algorithmic interventions for data efficiency

                         Are there simple data efficiency interventions
                                  that have been overlooked?




         Part 1: Using data better                            Part 2: Making ‘new’ data

Pre-training under infinite compute [ArXiv preprint]
Konwoo Kim*, Suhas Kotha*, Percy Liang, Tatsunori Hashimoto
Pretraining – hitting a wall?
   New, pretrained models – not quite as impressive


                                                            ~35x more expensive




   Discussions of the ‘end of pretraining’




               * Even if you think RL or continual learning are ‘ways out’ you still need data efficiency
 Existing approaches are quite bad for data efficiency
 What if we have infinite compute, and we just scale up epochs [e.g. Muenninghoff et al] and param size




We get no benefits past a point (600M params w/ 200M dataset) even with infinite compute
                   Note: overfitting is not benign in the LM pretraining case
Identifying simple, scalable data efficiency gains




   Q: if we had infinite compute, are there algorithms that would
              give us significantly more data efficiency?
     Developing algorithms for a compute rich future

                   How should we study the nearly infinite compute regime..
                             (without paying for infinite compute)



1.    Scale down the ‘world’
       (200M tokens, eval on perplexity)

2.    Compare algorithms via
      compute scaling asymptote

3.    Check validity by scaling up the
      ‘world size’ (200M -> 1.7B)


                                                                              … lim
                                                                                𝐶→∞
Scaling for performance prediction is not new
 Step 1: Fixing the ‘standard’ recipe for asymptotic losses
  With optimal (much higher) regularization + model scaling, we get clean scaling
     laws




                                                    30x higher weight decay




This improves data efficiency and gives our first asymptotic loss baseline (~3.43)
Going beyond regularization
                         Regularization is maybe too simple
              are there other ways of ‘trading compute for data efficiency’?




                 We have a wealth of theory and intuition for this regime
  Ensembling, data augmentation and similar leaderboard interventions come back in play

                                                                         [Herel and Mikolov 2023]
Step 2: Ensembling as a new axis of scaling




  Instead of bigger models, we could ensemble more models, fixing the total param count
                     Ensembles have far better asymptotes (~3.34)
Subtleties – limits and hyperparameters




Getting smooth ensemble scaling is hard – the best hyper params change w/ ensemble count
   This complicates the joint scaling problem of taking param + ensemble count to infinity
Ensembles are surprisingly good




   We estimate the perf of ensembles under infinite compute via a joint limit:
       First, ensemble count to infinity, then parameter count to infinity.
           This gives much, much better asymptotes (3.17 vs 3.34)

                           [n.b. We found this to be the easiest order of the limits to estimate via scaling laws.]
Ensembles for larger dataset sizes
       We were doing our analysis on small, fixed data (200M tokens, ~1.4B params).
                         Does this generalize to larger corpora?




Ensemble gains (left two panels) are consistent as we scale up the corpus (right)
    Surprising observation: ensemble distillation and self-training

Even with infinite training compute, we
still care about inference compute



•     Can we distil big ensembles into
      small models? (yes)


•     Can other ‘ensemble like methods
      like self-training also work? (yes)

     [This has interesting implications for
    data feedback loops / model collapse]
Can we trust small-scale perplexity evaluations?




Generally, yes (avg PIQA, ARC, SciQ)
• Noisier but generally similar scaling trends across all models
• Pareto-dominant models are all ensembles at large compute targets
Gains for continued pretraining




Gains on CPT / Midtraining – this is a naturally data constrained setting
• OctoThinker dataset / evaluations
• The “data efficient” recipes (batch size, epochs) help
• Ensembles help a lot for data efficiency
    Data in a compute rich future

                           Data bottlenecks open up interesting,
                            basic algorithms research for LLMs


  Open questions




                                       … lim
                                         𝐶→∞


Science of scaling laws for data efficiency    Better foundational understanding of ensembling
 Part 2: New horizons with synthetic data

                                 Can we ‘create’ new data?
                       What would that mean and why would that work?




      Part 1: Using data better                                            Part 2: Making ‘new’ data

Synthetic continued pretraining [ICLR 2025] - Zitong Yang*, Neil Band*, Shuangping Li, Emmanuel Candès, Tatsunori Hashimoto
Synthetic bootstrapped pretraining [ArXiv preprint] - Zitong Yang*, Aonan Zhang*, Hong Liu, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Emmanuel Candès,
Chong Wang, Ruoming Pang
Synthetic data as a major, current bet for data efficiency




       Many bets are currently being placed on ‘synthetic data’
             Is creating new data in this way really viable?
But the status quo for open synthetic data work is messy




 Distillation effects from larger models                    Post-training / alignment of existing capabilities




 Synthetic data has often been studied in the context of distillation / post -training


                                    * And sometimes people even refer to RL-like algorithms as synthetic data..
Synthetic data research poses new (scaling) challenges

    There is a ‘critical’ threshold for synthetic data to start working
                   This makes naïve scaling down hard!
Changing the setting – continued pretraining

Given:
• A pretrained model 𝑓
• A small domain of knowledge that can be characterized by some corpus
   (e.g. textbook for a specialized domain, proprietary corporate documents).



Goal:
• Modify the weights of 𝑓 such that
• The modified 𝑓 can perform a range of tasks – QA, summarization, as if it was
   pretrained on a large corpus containing our specialized knowledge
Our challenge: learning from 10,000x less data




        Can we adapt to knowledge that might be truly in the tail?
              Few hundred books with 10,000x less data
Attempt 1 – Just do continued pretraining
Problems with standard continued pretraining
Standard continued pretraining: train directly on our documents

                 using the small domain-specific corpus to synthesize a large corpus




                                                          Autoregressive LM



                 We propose to bridge this gap with synthetic continued pretraining:



Autoregressive learning is data-inefficient (reversal curse)
    In the autoregressive direction: “What does synthetic CPT do?”
    In the reverse direction: “What method synthesizes a large corpus?”
 Synthetic continued pretraining – augment the data
Synthetic continued pretraining: Train on LLM-transformed data

Goal – replicate the diversity of pretraining


                                                        {
• Vary content (topics)
• Vary style (how it’s presented)
• Data diversity for generalization                                         …   {
This is different from synthetic data or..
• compute / size efficiency (WRAP/Phi)
                                                        Autoregressive LM
• fine-tuning (task-specific LMs)

                                                LMaug

                                                        {                   …   {
Attempt 2 – Just paraphrase the data
  What we get: Entity-centric augmentation (EntiGraph)
 How do we get diversity? Use a knowledge graph to force diversity in content



1. Prompt LMaug for entities
   in a knowledge graph.
2. Sample k-subgraphs of
   the knowledge graph
3. LMaug synthesizes
   descriptions of the
   entities in the subgraph



      New implicit fact as data (The Louvre contains many works by DaVinci..)
A random graph model for synthetic data generation
                       What’s the ‘mathematical model’?

Explicit facts are connected edges between entities (vertices) on a random graph.
Implicit facts are paths within a connected component

             EntiGraph ‘connects’ the whole connected component


                            What does this imply?

A mixture-of-exponentials scaling law
(Closed-book) QA performance with EntiGraph




    Predictable, scaling gains for QA performance without the text
Can we go beyond prompting a model?

           We’ve validated a ‘scaled down’ idea with continued pretraining.



Can we get this to work in the “pure bootstrapping setting”? This means..

•   No pre-trained teacher (we have to train our own)
•   No strong hand-crafted prompts.




                 The first one is just a compute problem (‘train your own teacher’)
    The second one is a bit more subtle – what is a ‘general purpose’ way to learn to augment data?
Synthetic data as data augmentation




                 Maini et al ‘24                            Rao and ruderman ‘99

      Rephrasing is much like an label-invariant data augmentation
   There is a deep literature on unsupervised learning of transformations
                        (i.e. generators of a lie algebra)
       Learning augmentations and smoothing kernels

We showed a while ago that “learn augmentations from neighbors” also works for language models.




        This is a nonparametric language model where the kernel is learned [Guu, Hashimoto, Oren, Liang ‘18]
                         𝑃 𝑥 = 𝑃 𝑥 𝑥 ′ 𝑃 𝑥 ′ where 𝑃 𝑥 𝑥 ′ is an edit and 𝑃 𝑥 ′ is a prototype
Learning the augmentations from scratch
New synthetic data generation process: synthesizer trained on neighbor supervision

    Synthetic data is a supervised task of transforming a document into its neighbor




   Do these classic “transformation / lie group learning” methods translate to the pretraining setting?
Scaling up fast document nearest neighbor search




Scaling up nearest-neighbor search to pretraining scale (for both queries and keys)
                       requires careful handling of ANN indices
The overall procedure
The whole synthetic data / bootstrapping process is 3 simple steps given a base model
Step 1: Pair up nearest neighbors
       Define a inner product metric 𝑑, pair up neighbors with inner product > 𝛼

Step 2: Learn the augmentation
         Learn a conditional LM 𝑝(𝑥2 |𝑥1 ) by continuing to train the base model

Step 3: Generate synth data and train on it
              Sample new documents from 𝑝(𝑥2 |𝑥1 ) for each document,
            train a new model on a mix of synth + real data (1:3 and 1:8 ratios)
Initial steps at scaling
200 Billion token budget (deduplicated DCLM data) for a 3B model




              Notes: 75B synthetic repeated once, 10B real data repeated 12.5 times
Results at 3B/1T




     Gains (even at scale) capturing half the gains to having fresh data (oracle)
Qualitative evaluations of data quality across scales




   Data quality failures (repetition, low diversity, etc) decrease with scale
  Takeaways: synthetic data


                     Powerful, new forms of augmentation
       (and pretraining unlocks new, stronger gains from augmentations)




1. Can we completely close the ICL to parametric learning gap with enough compute?

2. What are the limits to synthetic data based augmentation?

3. What about synthetic data for reasoning?
Thanks!

Language modeling may return to a foundational challenge – generalizing from limited data



In many ways, this is challenging

          Algorithmic gains have been hard fought (and not that well understood)

But also it’s an exciting problem

              Foundational problems (might) require more radical solutions
