Magnetic Disks
 Mendel Rosenblum



   CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Magnetic Disks
Optional readings: Operating Systems: Principles and Practice: Chapter 12.1




                            CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
           Hard Disk Drive
     Actuator Arm
                                                   Platters 1-10
                                                     Spin at 5000-15000 RPM
                                                     2.5 inch and 3.5 inch sizes




                                                     Head
Actuator


            CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Organization of disk data
●   Circular tracks corresponding to a particular position of a disk head
     ○ Typical density today: few hundred thousand to about 500,000 tracks per radial inch

●   Tracks divided into 4096-byte sectors
     ○ Thousands to tens of thousands of sectors per track
                                                                              Platter
●   Typical total drive capacities: 500GB–30TB+
     ○ 1TB can store roughly 500 million pages of text
                                                                                        Track




                                                                                     Sector
                                 CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Reading and writing disks
1.   Seek: move actuator arm to position heads over desired track
      ○  Typical seek time: 3-10ms

2.   Select a particular head

3.   Rotational latency: wait for desired sector to pass under the head
      ○   One-half disk rotation on average (4ms @ 7500RPM)

4.   Transfer: read or write one or more sectors as they pass under the head
       ○  Typical transfer rates: 150–280 MBytes/sec

5.   Latency refers to the sum of seek time plus rotational latency; typically 5-15ms




                                    CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Disks are very high-tech devices
●   Read-write head must get extremely close to the disk surface
      ○   But not touch

●   Solution: the head “flies” above the disk on an air bearing created by the spinning platter dragging air with it.
      ○    Typical flying heights today are roughly 3–10 nm
      ○    For comparison, a human hair is about 80,000–100,000 nm thick

●   Tiny contaminants can damage the disk surface or head
      ○    Older disks were vulnerable to catastrophic head crashes caused by dust or physical shock

●   Modern drives are sealed in extremely clean enclosures

●   When the drive powers down, heads are usually moved to a parking ramp off the platter surface
     ○    Older drives used a landing zone directly on the disk surface

●   Laptop drives often included accelerometers that parked the heads if a fall was detected

●   Modern HDDs also compensate for vibration and thermal expansion automatically



                                                CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
CS 111 Lecture Notes: Disks   Slide 7
API for disks
 ●   Modern disks export disk as an linear array of blocks (e.g 0, 1, … N)

     read(startSector, sectorCount, physAddr)

     write(startSector, sectorCount, physAddr)

In the old days the track and surface structure of the disk was visible to software:
read(track, surface, sector, sectorCount, physAddr)

Nowadays the track structure is hidden inside the disk:
 ● Inner tracks have fewer sectors than outer tracks
 ● If some sectors are bad, disk software automatically remaps them to spare sectors.


                                      CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Communicating with I/O Devices
●   Modern CPU/MMUs device physical address space:
     ○   DRAM memory: cache line load and stores
     ○   I/O devices: uncached load and stores

●   I/O devices listen and respond to loads and stores at particular addresses
     ○   Called device registers
     ○   OS reads and writes device registers to control the device

●   Called memory-mapped input/output




                                    CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Device Registers
●   Bits in device registers serve 3 purposes:
     ○ Parameters to device - CPU store instruction
            ■   e.g. number of first sector to read
     ○ Status bits from device - CPU load instruction
            ■   e.g. "operation complete" or "error occurred"
     ○ Control bits set by CPU - CPU store instruction
            ■   e.g. "start disk read" to initiate operations.

●   Device registers don't behave like ordinary memory locations:
     ○ "Start operation" bit may always read as 0.
     ○ Bits may change without being written by CPU (e.g. "operation complete" bit).




                                    CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Example disk read I/O operation
●   CPU writes device registers to start operation (e.g., read sector)
     ○  Once operation has started, ready bit reads as zero
     ○  When operation is finished, device sets ready bit to one

●   Remaining steps:
     ○ How does the OS know when the device is finished the operation?
     ○ Where does the bytes from the read sector go?




                                    CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Device done signals to the Operating System
●   Poll: Have OS spin reading the device's ready bit
     ○   CPU wastes time until the I/O finishes

●   Interrupt: Have device force the CPU to trap
     ○   Allows CPU to do other work while devices are operating
     ○   Device needs attention (i..e. operation completes): it interrupts the CPU




                                     CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Interrupt processing
●   Device posts an interrupt to CPU
     ○   Trap: Switch CPU to particular address in the kernel
          ■ Interrupt trap vector also used by system calls, page faults, etc.
     ○   Operating system figures out which device interrupted, services that device
          ■ Acknowledge the interrupt and possibly start a new operation
     ○   After interrupt, return from trap
          ■ Execution resume from where left off

●   Interrupts make the operating system much more efficient
     ○   Can keep many devices busy at the same time, while also running user code
     ○   Multi-core machines spread the interrupts around to balance loads

●   Both CPU and devices after interrupt enable/disable flags

                                    CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Data transfers to and from I/O device
●   Programmed Input/Output (PIO)
     ○   Have CPU do loads or stores to device registers to transfer the data
     ○   Simple but very wasteful of CPU

●   Direct Memory Access (DMA)
     ○ Device can transfer data to and from physical memory, without help from the CPU
     ○ CPU loads buffer address into a device register before starting operation
           ■ e.g., where to copy data read from disk
     ○ Device moves data directly to/from physical memory




                                    CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Modern device interface
●   Mainly use DMA with minimal programmed I/O for doorbell
●   Device and OS share data structures in memory
     ○   Command queue for communication going from OS to device
     ○   Response queue for communication going from device to OS

●   Example: Disk read of sector 32
     ○   OS build a command block in Command queue (e.g. read sector 32 into this address)
     ○   OS does a uncached write to a location notifying device of new command (i.e. doorbell)
     ○   Device uses DMA to read the command from the Command queue
     ○   Device uses DMA to write the sector bytes to the specified address
     ○   Device uses DMA to write the completion response in the Response queue
     ○   Device posts an interrupt to the CPU


                                    CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
Old-Style Magnetic Tape




     CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
     CS 111 Lecture Notes: Disks            Slide 16
System 360 Datacenter




    CS111 Lecture Notes - Magnetic Disks
    CS 111 Lecture Notes: Disks            Slide 17
